---
layout: post
title: "Books I've read in the second quarter of 2017"
date: 2017-07-03 20:50:00 +0200
---
**[Grammar Girl's Quick and Dirty Tips for Better Writing](https://www.amazon.com/dp/0805088318/)**

Mignon Fogarty, aka Grammar Girl, is best known for her educational,
award-winning podcast Grammar Girl Quick and Dirty Tips for Better Writing.
With over 500 episodes, spread over more than 10 years of existence, it's
one of the longest-lived and most popular active podcasts. It's a shame
I never had the time to listen to it, so I tried to partially redeem
myself by reading this book, which could be described as the collection
of the greatest hits from the podcast.

The book delivers exactly what is promised on the cover: collection of
short and useful tips that will help you improve your writing. Grammar Girl
explores various topics, including grammar, punctuation, usage and style.
This book is especially useful if you are not a native English speaker or
don't have much writing experience. Combine it with Strunk and White's The
Elements of Style and you will get tremendous results in just a few hours.

The thing I liked the most about the book is Grammar Girl's gentle approach
to teaching. She never tries to be authoritative or judgmental, unlike most
of the other academically oriented authors writing about grammar. She also
offers a lot of examples, analogies and silly memory tricks: you will
always remember the difference between i.e. and e.g. after reading
[this](http://www.quickanddirtytips.com/education/grammar/ie-versus-eg).

Grammar Girl's book helped me a lot and I can't recommend it enough.
If you are into audiobooks, be sure to pick up the audiobook version,
because her narration is as great as the content itself.

**[Spelunky (Boss Fight Books Book 11)](https://www.amazon.com/dp/B01CYVHYSS/)**

Spelunky is a procedurally generated platformer created by Derek Yu.
It was one of the most critically acclaimed games of the last decade.
Even though I love the roguelike genre (I've spent hundreds of hours
in The Binding of Isaac, Nuclear Throne and Galak-Z), I've never played
Spelunky, but that didn't prevent me from reading the book about it.

Spelunky book was written by the game's author himself. I began reading without
high expectations, but after only a few pages I knew
I was in for a treat. Derek is a game designer, but his writing puts a lot of
professional writers to shame. He presents the complete history of the game
and talks about his game-design philosophy. Nowadays, when
you can get achievement for literally starting the game, games that
don't hold your hand every step of the way give you back hope. On
every page of this book I found some idea that made me think "This is how
games should be made!" This book quote best sums up Spelunky's philosophy:

>We can't have everything that we want all at once, though.
We can't know what to expect and also be surprised.
We can't be free from frustration and also be challenged.

Spelunky is built on simple ideas. Derek explains how the
levels are generated and how game characters behave. One would
think that understanding these systems would take away something
from game enjoyment, but it's the complete opposite. Many of the
game's "bugs" resulted in some fascinating new way to beat the game
([Solo Eggplant Run](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LGrPeu5NWk0)
by Bananasaurus Rex was particularly impressive and nerve-racking).
Spelunky can be completed in
[less than two minutes](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s2pG2loLdmY),
but it takes hundreds of hours to master it.

You don't have to know anything about the game to enjoy this book.
Whether you are a gamer, a game-designer, or just a programmer, this
book absolutely belongs on your bookshelf.

**[Production-Ready Microservices: Building Standardized Systems Across an Engineering Organization](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1491965975/)**

Microservices are all the rage these days, so I wanted to become more
familiar with some of the best practices in the field. This book had
some good reviews and was relatively short. Besides that, Susan J. Fowler
is probably a microservices expert, having previously worked on microservices
standardization at Uber, and currently working as an engineer on the in
infrastructure team at Stripe (she is also an Editor in Chief of
[Increment](https://increment.com/), which you should totally read).
That lead me to believe she would certainly have some unique insights
to offer. Unfortunately, this book fell short of my expectations.

Central theme of Production-Ready Microservices is building available
services, which require the following goals to be met: stability,
reliability, scalability, fault tolerance, catastrophe-preparedness,
performance, monitoring, and documentation. If you already know how
to achieve them, this book doesn't offer you anything new. If you don't,
it will not help you implement any of them. Some of the important
topics were only mentioned in passing. For example,
service discovery has one dedicated paragraph; you can't really do
anything with that. Besides that, all of the book's
topics had been previously described more in-depth in both
[SRE Book](https://landing.google.com/sre/book.html) and
[The Cloud Book](http://the-cloud-book.com/).
Even though the book is very short, it's not really packed with content;
James Hamilton talks about the most important ideas behind internet-scale
services in less than twenty pages in his paper
[On Designing and Deploying Internet-Scale Services](https://www.usenix.org/legacy/event/lisa07/tech/full_papers/hamilton/hamilton_html/).
One great thing about this book are checklists at
the end of each chapter, but even they are inferior to checklists from
The Cloud Book.

Susan's heart is at the right place, but the book could have been a
lot better. She did much better job with the [Increment](https://increment.com/).
Go read it instead.

**[Distributed systems for fun and profit](http://book.mixu.net/distsys/single-page.html)**

Distributed systems are incredibly hard to get right; just read any of the
Kyle Kingsbury's [Jepsen](http://jepsen.io/analyses) analyses and you'll
see what I'm talking about. Even though there is a lot of literature on
the topic, most of it is in the form of academic papers, thus making it
hard for beginners to get started in the field. During one of his Jepsen
talks, Kyle mentioned this free online book as a good introduction to distributed
systems. I had it bookmarked for more than a year, but now I finally found
some real motivation to read it.

This book only touches the surface of distributed systems. It's also very short:
less than 100 printed pages. Nevertheless, it still talks about all the important
stuff: CAP theorem and FLP impossibility, time and order, consistency models
and protocols, CRDTs, etc. Each chapter provides a high-level overview of a single topic.
You will not be able to implement any of the described algorithms, but don't worry:
each of the key papers in the field is mentioned, so you'll know where to find a
more serious treatment. Even though the book is aimed at beginners, I think some
parts of it you can understand only if you have some previous knowledge. For example,
2PC and Paxos are described briefly, but there is no way you could understand what is
really going on if this is the first time you encounter these two protocols.

You will not become an expert after reading this book, but at least you will get to
know the most important ideas behind modern distributed systems. It is also short,
so there is no excuse for not reading it. If you like it, you should also consider
reading Kyle's [notes on distributed systems](https://github.com/aphyr/distsys-class).

**[Hitler's Hangman: The Life of Heydrich](https://www.amazon.com/dp/B0063CU63K/)**

Reinhard Heydrich was one of the most sinister and dangerous Nazi officials. He was
a chief of the Reich Security Main Office, Reich Protector of Bohemia and Moravia, and
creator of infamous Einsatzgruppen. Even though he was one of the key architects of
the Final Solution, he is not as widely recognized by the general public as Heinrich
Himmler, for example. Part of the reason for that is probably that he never received
much attention in literature of the Third Reich. This book attempts to collect all the
known information about Heydrich into a single, readable volume: everything from his early
childhood to his assassination in Operation Anthropoid.

Nothing in his childhood indicated what he would eventually become. Initially, he
was not even a model Nazi: he was dismissed from the German navy, which devastated
him and threatened to end his career. The key moment in his life came after that,
when he landed a job in the SS. It's extraordinary how some moments can shape the
history of humanity. He was not qualified for the job in the intelligence organization,
but because he was reading a lot of crime fiction at the time, he was able to impress
Himmler who was even less qualified. This book is full of similarly interesting details
about him. For example, did you know he was flying combat missions for Luftwaffe and
was once hit by the Soviet fire behind enemy lines, but somehow managed to escape?
Or that his assassination could have been a complete failure? Heydrich actually died
of sepsis during his recovery in the hospital, where penicillin shot could have saved him
had it been used at the time. For these little pieces of knowledge alone, this book is
worth reading. But that's not all: you'll learn about his meteoritic rise through
Nazi ranks, history of the Final Solution, his terror rule in the Czechoslovakia,
and the constant fight for power between him and other Nazi figures.

Hitler's Hangman is a great read, but not without flaws. Good part of the book describes
general history of security organizations and Nazi terror in Germany. If you are a seasoned
World War II reader, you are probably familiar with most of it. Also, I did not get as much
insight into Heydrich's personality as I have hoped, but because I learned so many new things
from this book, that's not a huge problem. If you are like me and want to learn as much as
possible about Third Reich, you should absolutely read this book. If you are just a casual
reader, you might want to skip it and read some of the great general histories of the Third Reich.

**[I Will Teach You To Be Rich](https://www.amazon.com/dp/B004WL4BW6/)**

I usually stay away from all self-help or get-rich-quickly books, but this one is different.
Judging this book only by the title, you would be tempted to put it in the same category with
thousands of other garbage books on the same topic, but you would be wrong—Ramit Sethi actually
knows what he's talking about. I first became familiar with him when I read two of his interviews
with [Patrick McKenzie](http://www.kalzumeus.com/):
[Ramit Sethi and Patrick McKenzie on Getting Your First Consulting Client](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2012/09/17/ramit-sethi-and-patrick-mckenzie-on-getting-your-first-consulting-client/) and
[Ramit Sethi and Patrick McKenzie On Why Your Customers Would Be Happier If You Charged More](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2012/09/21/ramit-sethi-and-patrick-mckenzie-on-why-your-customers-would-be-happier-if-you-charged-more/).
He had some great advice for running the consulting business, which lead me to think his
book might actually be good.

Despite what the title says, this book is not about getting rich in the way people usually
think about it—it's about managing your money responsibly (don't get me wrong, you will have
hundreds of thousands of dollars saved for your retirement if you follow his advice from the
book, but that's not the first thing people have in mind when talking about getting rich).
Everything in this book has been said elsewhere before, but Ramit combines all of that
and talks about money in a way everybody can understand. One would think that in the 21st
century managing your credit cards responsibly, putting the money in 401(k) and investing
money into index funds would be common knowledge, but that's not the case in practice.
Ramit tries to correct that. You will learn everything you need to know about credit cards,
checking and savings accounts, 401(k) and Roth IRA, index and lifecycle funds, buying a house
or a car, and much, much more. You will also learn that investing is not about picking stocks,
and that by only using an index fund for investing, you will automatically be ahead of most professionals
that actively manage funds.

Everything is nicely summarized at the end of each chapter,
so you can easily come back and remind yourself when needed. This book could have been
much shorter (you could essentially just read
[this comment](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=10114707)
for investing the right way), but because everything in it is incredibly
important, I don't mind it that much: he had to get the point across, and that means he had
to go into details sometimes or say things repeatedly. As a nice bonus, he also talks about his
personal financial setup: which credit cards he's using, which banks he's using and what
types of accounts he has, how does he split money between accounts automatically, etc.

This book is mostly focused on readers living in the US, but that doesn't mean you shouldn't
read it if you are living somewhere else. Most of the advice applies everywhere in the
world—you can manage your debt, use an online bank, save money, or get a raise wherever you
live. Highly recommended.

**[Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace](https://www.amazon.com/dp/0134080416/)**

I read The Elements of Style about half a year ago, immediately after starting this blog.
It's classic and indispensable resource that has stood the test of time, but it is only
a starting point for aspiring writers. I needed a more comprehensive and detailed style
guide. Grammar Girl's book was a nice addition, and Garner's Modern English Usage is
fantastic reference, but for more lessons on writing style, I had to look elsewhere.
[Matt Might](http://matt.might.net/) recommended this book multiple times. You really can't
go wrong following Matt's advice, so reading it was a natural choice.

The book starts with the quote from Matthew Arnold:

>Have something to say, and say it as clearly as you can. That is the only secret of style.

This is Style in a nutshell. Despite what many people believe, there is nothing bad in
writing short and clear sentences. How many times have you struggled with textbooks
and papers, thinking you are not smart enough to understand what the writer had to say?
But it was not really your fault—even the most advanced ideas can be expressed clearly,
and this book will show you how to achieve that clarity. Good writing happens on multiple
levels (read [this](http://blog.bennettandbennett.com/2015/09/2015-78-a-taxonomy-of-bad-writing/)
excellent article for a great summary of where writing can go wrong) and Style talks about
each of them. It starts with basic correctness, advances to coherence on local
and global level, and finally finishes with chapters on shape and elegance. Every advice
is simple and practical. Here are just a few examples:

>Make main characters the subjects of sentences.
Make important actions verbs.
Put old information before new information.

It sounds simple and obvious, but it's often overlooked in practice. I also often
fall into a trap of writing too many words just for the sake of it. Advices like
this now make me think twice before I try to use a redundant word:

>Delete words that mean little or nothing.
Delete words implied by other words.
Replace a phrase with a word.

Each lesson has fantastic summary at the end, so you can easily come back at any
time and remind yourself of the most important principles. You can also put your
newly found knowledge into action by doing exercises, which are really fun.
Unfortunately, terrible navigation in the digital version (VitalSource Bookshelf)
of the book prevented me from doing them in my first reading. Don't repeat my mistake
and get the paper book to get the most out of it.

Like in any other profession, you can't become an expert overnight. You have to
put a lot of time into writing to really improve it. Just reading books is not
enough, but it's still necessary, and this one is the single best resource on
writing well I've found so far. You should read it multiple times to absorb all it has to offer.

**[Unwanted Advances: Sexual Paranoia Comes to Campus](https://www.amazon.com/dp/B01LYS5X4O/)**

Unwanted Advances is a terrific book about the
[insanity](http://blog.bennettandbennett.com/2016/11/alices-adventures-in-lovett-hall/)
that [Title IX](http://blog.bennettandbennett.com/2016/11/fixing-university-justice/)
has become in recent years. Jeff Gamso already wrote a great
[review](http://gamso-forthedefense.blogspot.rs/2017/04/how-far-weve-fallen.html)
of the book and I wholeheartedly agree with everything he says. I couldn't
possible add anything useful to what he said, so this time I'll skip writing
my own review and just forward you to his.

**[High Performance Browser Networking](https://hpbn.co/)**

Despite the bandwidth growth, modern web can sometimes seem worse that
it was two decades ago (as Dan Luu would say,
[most of the web really sucks if you have a slow connection](https://danluu.com/web-bloat/)).
With the rise of the mobile devices, web performance is more important
than it ever was. If you want to deliver the best possible experience
to your users, look no further—High Performance Browser Networking
is a classic book in this field.

This book talks about everything you need to know about the networking
as a web or a mobile application developer: network types (WiFi, 3G, 4G),
internet protocols (TCP, UDP, TLS), application protocols
(HTTP/1.1, HTTP/2), and high-level browser APIs (XMLHttpRequest,
Server-Sent Events, WebSockets, WebRTC). Even if you are familiar with
some (or all) of the topics, you will learn something new and interesting.
For example, I never cared about how cellular networks work,
but I learned a lot about them reading this book. And it’s not just
trivia—knowing how modern mobile networks work is surprisingly relevant
to performance. For that reason alone, this book was worth reading for me.

Most people think about the bandwidth as the most important aspect of web
performance, and incorrectly assume that their performance problems will
sort themselves out with the increased bandwidth. What I liked the most
about this book is that the author correctly recognizes that the
performance bottleneck for most websites is actually latency and
makes it one of the central topics of the book.

To sum things up: if you are developing web or mobile applications,
you should read this book. It’s completely free, so there
is no excuse for not reading it (having to pay for it should not
really be an excuse anyway).

**[The Third Reich at War](https://www.amazon.com/dp/0143116711/)**

This is the third and the final part of the monumental Richard J. Evans' Third
Reich trilogy (you can find my review of the second book in my
[previous]({{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2017-04-06-books-2017-q1 %}) summary of reading).
It covers the Second World War, but mostly from the German perspective (Pacific War was not
even mentioned, for example). That means it's not the best choice if you want to
get a comprehensive view of World War II from a single volume
(Anthony Beevor's [The Second World War](https://www.amazon.com/dp/B007ME5BUG/)
could be a good option in that case). In every other way, it's magnificent.

Even though this is a very long book, it contains only a small (but fantastic)
selection of topics. After all, any single book can only scratch the surface
of the most documented war in human history. Here are just a few examples to
illustrate what I'm talking about:

- This book talks about Operation Barbarossa in about a couple dozen pages,
thus making it one of the better covered topics. But to even begin to understand
what really happened in the Eastern Front, you would have to read something like
[War Without Garlands: Operation Barbarossa 1941-1942](https://www.amazon.com/dp/B005JZ6T4M/).
Battle of Stalingrad was also covered, but for a comprehensive understanding
you would have to read
[Stalingrad: The Fateful Siege: 1942-1943](https://www.amazon.com/dp/0140284583/).

- Operation Overlord played the critical part in the liberation of Europe.
It was mentioned in this book only in passing, in single sentence, but there
is a whole book dedicated only to it:
[Overlord: D-Day and the Battle for Normandy](https://www.amazon.com/dp/B0112OOOPE/).

- Nazi concentration camps are covered in great detail, so you will actually
get a fairly good understanding of them. But again, there is so much more
to learn about them. You want a comprehensive history? Read
[KL: A History of the Nazi Concentration Camps](https://www.amazon.com/dp/B00NS3NBWU/).
You want to know more only about Operation Reinhard death camps?
[Belzec, Sobibor, Treblinka](https://www.amazon.com/dp/B002DML0KM/)
is the book for you. How about just Auschwitz?
[Anatomy of the Auschwitz Death Camp](https://www.amazon.com/dp/025320884X/)
is only one of the vast number of books on Auschwitz. The list goes on and on.

This book paints a picture about World War II using only a small number
of carefully selected topics. From the military standpoint, you will
learn about occupation of Poland, invasion of Russia, Battle of Stalingrad,
Battle of Kursk, and the final defeat of Nazi Germany, among others. But
this book doesn't talk about military history as much as about the
social aspects of the war: harsh living conditions in the ghettos of Poland,
evolution of the Final Solution, life in Germany during the War (including
the effects of the allied bombing campaigns on people), Nazi treatment of
Jews, gypsies, homosexuals and other minorities, T4 program and wartime
medical experiments, etc.

Evans himself is a great writer; the book will keep your attention until
the last page. He also tries to be as objective and as honest as possible,
without being judgmental. As I said previously: if you have the time, you
should absolutely read this trilogy—it is one of the greatest history works
ever written.

**[Twitter and Tear Gas: The Power and Fragility of Networked Protest](https://www.amazon.com/dp/B06XR259MG/)**

[Zeynep Tufekci](https://twitter.com/zeynep) is one of my favorite people
on Twitter. She plays an incredibly important role in raising the awareness
about effects of technology on politics and society. One of her recent
efforts was writing an
[open letter](http://technosociology.org/?page_id=1687)—signed by the
world’s foremost experts on security—calling the Guardian to retract
the irresponsible story about the alleged WhatsApp backdoor. These are just
some of the many reasons I was super excited about her writing a book.

Twitter and Tear Gas describes how social networks forever changed the
landscape of protests, with all the good and the bad sides that
accompanied the change. Facebook and Twitter are replacing the mainstream
media, enabling people to bypass the government censorship, but are also
bringing new set of problems—we have just replaced one form of censorship with
another, where algorithms and Silicon Valley geeks can decide what is news,
who can speak and who can't (even though that's not the main topic of the
book, it is the most scary one to me). Technology is helping ordinary people,
but oppressive regimes can use it, too—if Recep Tayyip Erdoğan had not
used the FaceTime during the recent coup, it probably would have been successful and
the Turkey could have been a completely different country today.

I was already familiar with most of the topics in the book, so I didn't
learn much from it, but that's not really the book's fault. The only real
complaint I have is that some chapters are too abstract and uninformative, but
besides that, it's a great read.

**[Cracking the Coding Interview: 189 Programming Questions and Solutions](https://www.amazon.com/dp/0984782850/)**

Software developer job interview process is hopelessly
[broken](https://sockpuppet.org/blog/2015/03/06/the-hiring-post/)
(for a more poetic take, you should absolutely read Kyle
Kingsbury's wonderful trilogy on
[technical interviews](https://aphyr.com/tags/Interviews)).
With Google [leading](https://twitter.com/danluu/status/864135668250890240)
the [way](https://twitter.com/danluu/status/863461948440162304), the
situation is unlikely to change soon. Passing the programming interview
requires the skills that are completely unrelated to the skills needed to
actually perform well on your job. This book will help you pass the interview
without actually learning algorithms or being able to deliver solutions
to the real-world problems you will be facing.

The problems in this book are completely disconnected from the reality,
but that's the problem of the interview process—the author of the book
just takes the advantage of the unfortunate state of affairs. If you
though that the FizzBuzz was complete nonsense, wait until you see
the multithreaded version! Lot of the problems are posed with silly and
unrealistic restrictions, where perfectly sane solution for a problem
is not allowed, in order to test… I have no idea what. Some problems
promote terrible coding practices. For example, almost every solution
in the strings chapter assumes ASCII encoding, and would be completely
broken for Unicode.

What I especially disliked about this book was the attitude that you
should be able to rederive algorithms that some of the greatest minds
in computer science invented. On whiteboard. In thirty minutes.

>You might recognize this as the topological sort algorithm on page 632.
We've rederived this from scratch. Most people won't know this algorithm
and it's reasonable for an interviewer to expect you to be able to derive it.

That's [Kahn's algorithm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Topological_sorting#Kahn.27s_algorithm).
You should also be able to reinvent
[precedence climbing](http://eli.thegreenplace.net/2012/08/02/parsing-expressions-by-precedence-climbing),
Floyd's [Tortoise and Hare](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cycle_detection#Floyd.27s_Tortoise_and_Hare)
algorithm, and Dijkstra's [Shunting-yard](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shunting-yard_algorithm)
algorithm. All of the previous algorithms are described in the book like
something that you should be able to come up with on your own (without
mentioning the authors). That's just completely insane.

If your only goal is to game the programming interview, but not really
learn about algorithms, this book is a fine choice. But even in that
is the case, better choice, in my opinion, would be
[Elements of Programming Interviews](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1479274836/).
It is strictly superior in every way, but also harder to get through.
If you actually want to learn about algorithms, read
[Algorithms](https://www.amazon.com/dp/0073523402/),
[The Algorithm Design Manual](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1848000693/), or
[Introduction to Algorithms](https://www.amazon.com/dp/0262033844/).
